15th of July, sitting at 2720 Camelot and Bryan in a
very comfortable, looks like a TV room, with
Colonel Joe T. Haney, about to chat with him about
his experiences, particularly with the A&M Band.
Hello, here I am sitting with Haskell watching the
new patio we just put in the back and it's such a
beautiful day and we're both glad to be here and we
hope this is a fruitful experience.
Let's begin with your briefly summarizing your
experience growing up and going to college and so
forth, before going to high school and all, before
you came to A&M? Where was home? my home is in marlin
texas and i was a product of the marlin public
schools and i graduated from marlin high school
and upon graduation in may my mother packed me up in
my uh with my foot locker and sent me to texas a m and i
became a fish in the texas aggie band and i lived in
bezell hall what this was the summer of 1944
and uh i was in the band that summer and then after
the end of the summer well I have vacated A&M and I
had to prepare myself to go into the service you
know the war was going on then when you're 18 years
old you're gone and so I entered the the armed
services, the army. I went to Sam Houston for basic
training and then at this point in time I was
offered an opportunity to go to officer's
training school which I could see in 19, right at
1945 that the war was near completion so I decided
not to go that route. I stayed in there for two
years. I spent 14 months in Korea. When I was in
Korea, I played in the 282nd AGF band and was
stationed in Seoul, Korea. lived in the Red Cross
building and we had a rehearsed every day and every
afternoon before the movie for all the troops
there in Seoul we would play a concert four days a
week we would play with a concert band and three
days a week we would play with a large dance band or
stage band and So I got some marvelous experience,
and I stayed over there about 14 months. Then upon
arrival back in the United States with my
honorable discharge in my hand, I decided to study
music, which I could not do at A&M, so I went to
Southern Methodist University. In 1950, I got a
Bachelor of Music there, and then started
teaching band. My first band job was in Hemp Hill,
Texas. Started the band there. It was the only one I
could find in the state of Texas that had not had a
band before because I wanted to learn about twice
as much as they did, which I did. At that point, I got
this marvelous offer to go to Calvert, Texas.
Calvert was really a blow-and-go in town in those
days. I was a counselor at a boys' camp in Rio Vista.
I had the president of the school board signing
Calvert. And he hired me on the spot, and so I stayed
in Calvert for four years, which were very
fruitful years. So that would have been 1950. That
was 1951 to 1955, I believe. And we had a real good
band in Calvert, which they had not had before, but
we did a lot of work and growing. And I decided that I
needed to go to a larger system, so I went to
Wharton, Texas, as the band director. And I stayed
there only one year, and the job at Mahea opened.
And I went there with Mr. Alton Bowen, who
eventually became the head of the Texas Education
Agency and was also the superintendent of schools
here in Bryan. And so I moved to Mejia with Mr.
Bowen. And I stayed there 16 years. And they were
very fruitful years. And we had an outstanding
band program there. And from there, I came to A&M in
1972. Colonel Adams, who was the director of the
Aggie band, and I had been friends for years and
years before this took place. We used to hunt quail
a lot, and our band and the Aggie band did exactly
the same kind of 65 precision marching. And so we
decided, Mary and I decided that this was a great
move and so we moved to Bryan in 1972 and I became the
associate director of the Fightin' Texas Aggie
Band. And in 1973 when Byrne retired, well I became
the director of the Aggie Band and that was
certainly a marvelous experience to just
continue the work in the 65 precision marching
that I had been doing for all those years. I was a
high school band director for 22 years before I
came to Texas A&M. So I was not just somebody that
fell off the turnip truck. I kind of knew what I was
talking about. Our bands in Mejia had been
consistent sweepstakes bands all those years and
we had many many many students in the Allstate band
and we had quite a few that went on to study music and
become band directors and besides that in Mejia I
had 31 places I could hunt quail and and had a nice
golf course to play. Mary and I both had carts and
six or eight wonderful places to fish and it was
just it was a marvelous experience there. but of
course as soon as I got used at A&M got used to the
fact that driving up to the big buildings and
parking in my own parking place well then we began
to settle down and do the work at hand and so I stayed
then at Texas A&M for 17 years and I retired in 1989
and after having 41 years in teacher's retirement
so I've had a full life directing bands in the state
of Texas. Splendid. Did that brief, let's see you
were here as a student only one summer? One summer,
that is correct. Did that get embedded in your
heart deeply? Well, I had that a lot earlier,
Haskell, because all of my family on one side had
graduated from A&M. And they were dyed into wool
laggies, and I was bleeding maroon when I was 10
years old. And I really, that's the only place that
I wanted to go. But now when I came in the summer of
1944, I studied accounting. and that was what I had
maybe a CPA or something of that nature and I
decided that that's not what I wanted to do and and
so that's the main reason I did not come back but it
has always been deep in my heart and of course The
Aggie band has always been my favorite band in this
world. And when I became a director down here, well
then it was my number one interest other than my
family and Marion. And I just have had this maroon
all my life I guess, this maroon blood, and I just
don't guess I will ever get it out of my system. Now
that brief experience in the Army with a band, that
was primarily a performance band, not much
marching? Well it was, we were there in Korea. I
played in several bands. through
basic and just the post bands and then when I went to
I decided not to go to officers training school
then they sent me to Fort Monmouth New Jersey and I
became a radio operator And I played in a very fine
band up there. We played for the likes of Big Damone
and several others while I was there. And then when
I went overseas, the radio operator's job was not a
pleasant thing. They would send us up in these
mountains where it was about 15 below, and you'd
send code back and forth. And the communists there
did not know that the war was over. and it was not
very much fun so the first pass that I received I
went to Sewell and I saw this big band sitting up
there on that stage playing this broadcast and I
said oh my goodness wouldn't that be marvelous so I
go in and talk to the Lieutenant Miller who was in
charge of the band and he played with the Dorsey
Orchestra and the New York Philharmonic And he
asked me what I played. I told him. And he said,
well, would you be interested in moving over here?
And I said, I certainly would. He said, are you
good? I said, yes, sir, I am. He said, well, I want to
hear you because our first trombone player just
left and went back to the States and we don't have
one there. So I go on trombone. so i go back there and
audition for him and he said you'll be here next
monday if you want to come i said yes sir i do and next
monday there was a jeep waiting for me about six in
the morning to take me to sewell and i stayed there
most i stayed there about 13 months in that band it
was a marvelous band and he was a marvelous man and
on saturday he would give us uh arranging a little
course in arranging and composing and chords and
musical facts that we needed to know to be a
composer and arranger. And I really enjoyed that.
And I think that's the main thing that that made me
change my mind as to what I wanted to be and I still
thank a lot of him and I'm sure he's passed away but
he was such a fine man and such a fine musician and he
really influenced my life and what I wanted to do.
And the military style marching, the six to five,
so that came kind of naturally. In high school did
you all? Well in high school we did not really march
to the yard lines. You know now they march to the
yard lines. You take six steps to the yard lines
every yard line and you hit that with your six steps
and that's the main way that we stay in line. You
march a 30-inch step in the service, and of course I
liked that, and I didn't like the high-stepping,
prancing things, and my high school band was
really quite good at that. We marched and did many
things. We were on television five times just
because we were good, not because our football
team was good. And we marched at the Cotton Bowl and
things of this nature, played for the governor
several times. And that was fascinating to me, the
things that you could do with a group just on a
football field. But if those lines, when they
start putting the lines in, and the main reason
they did that is mostly for the bands, because the
football fields years ago were just lined off
every 10 yards, some of them every 20 yards. And so
then they started putting it in and it just
simplified everything and gave the bands a larger
opportunity to do a lot of difficult things. And so
I just loved that and I did all of the drills myself
for 17 years and I just got a big kick out of doing
them. I just really enjoyed it. Doing it and
watching them doing it and then to see to see if it
worked out real good and usually it did they those
guys are all smart and they they could play well and
You put those two together with a good drill and you
just have something that's really nice to watch
Now your SMU band experience it was They played
they were they were they played the football band
played jazz most of the time and they were high
steppers and I did it and but I also played in the
symphonic band and I played in several brass
choirs and things of this nature and I studied
privately on the horn and that
was mostly a learning experience on playing and I
was trying to learn how to Teach all the other
students in the school when I when I started
teaching how to play all the instruments I had to
learn how to play all the brass instruments all the
woodwind instruments. I had a lesson in
percussion in strings and So this was more or less
an educational experience. Although it was a nice
musical experience. We had some great players
there but the I just marched in the in the Mustang
band because I Had to do it was one of the main
reasons I had to do it and I wanted to do it And I like
jazz. I like the jazz that they play. And so I really
enjoyed that up there. And then in Sam Houston,
when I got my master's degree, it was more or less
just a continuation of what we were doing. And I
also played in the Houstonian, which was their
jazz band down there. And I got my tuition for the
summer there playing in that band. But the
marching, 65 marching came when I came to Mahea. I
had not done that. The East Texas bands over there
do it, and they still do it. And I had the first
National Association of Military Marching Band
contest here, which I was one of the founders of
that. And we had 24 bands, and the requirements
were that you played a military-oriented music,
and you had to march in military style. And if you
did not meet these requirements, you couldn't
enter. And the first year we had it at Kyle Field, we
had 24 bands there, and at the presentations, we
had about 14,000, 15,000 people to see it. So the
Aggie Band performed just as an exhibition thing,
and they've been having it ever since. That was in
1988, the first one was held at A&M. And that was
quite an experience for everybody. And so the
military bands in the high schools are still
going. They're very strong in East Texas. And
you'll see them scattered around, but in East
Texas, they're very, very strong. they're still
having that contest although they can't have it
here anymore because of the grass field they won't
let them have it on the grass so let's see for trivia
what was your pay that beginning year that first
year at hemp hill the first year i taught school at
hemp hill i made twenty four hundred dollars for
the first year And most of them want to make that now
the first week. But that's all I had. And with my
first paycheck, I bought me a horse. And I had money
in the bank. And I had a car and a set of golf clubs.
And I saved money. So things were a lot different
then. But that was the basic pay for all teachers in
1950. And that's what I received was the base pay.
And they moved a school building into Hemphill.
And they had no horns. They had no uniforms. They
had no music. And the superintendent said, I'm
going to give you $2,000 and you just buy all them
horns you need. And so we had to make a few
adjustments. But I have pictures of the band. I
started the first concert we played at the end of
the year. We had 54 and they all had on uniforms.
That was quite an experience too. I've had some
marvelous experiences with bands. Now as you got
closer to here, reach back and describe Colonel
Adams as a person and his style and manner. Colonel
Adams and I hunted quail for years and years and he
always seemed very interested in me personally
and my band personally and he would come to the
marching contest and see us and he was very very
strict with his uh his his marching cadence and he
the Aggie band marches 104 steps per minute and he
liked he liked for the bands to be slower and I do too
I did too we marched about 112 in my high school but
for instance the the normal cadence of review was
120. and so when I came here That was the cadence
that they were using strictly because it was Army
regulations. Well, Colonel Tom Parsons and I,
there was always a conflag between the Corps and
the band because of the faster cadence. So I went to
see him one day and said, now there's no uh...
provisions anywhere for somebody wearing senior
boots they cannot march a hundred and twenty and so
we we cut it to a hundred and twelve and it's made the
review so much better and they're still doing that
but colonel adams was a very strict man he was uh...
uh... he he was a a very fair man and uh... he was
certainly an honest man and uh... he did a he did a
fine job with this with the aggie band they uh...
and and all of the men uh... appeared to like him
very very much and he was a very popular person I
think he was here for twenty seven years and I think
I was the third band director full time band
director that they had in the history of the school
so from nineteen twenty three to nineteen eighty
nine I believe they had three band directors and
that speaks highly for the job I think and so we We
would always meet, Colonel Adams and I and Mary and
his wife Belle. We'd meet at the TBA, the Texas Band
Marital Association. We'd go out to eat. So we were
very, very close friends for I guess 20 years
before I came to A&M. And he ran a tight ship, I'll
tell you that for sure. And everybody conformed to
his way of doing it. And his way was the good way,
because they were very successful in what they
did. And so I was, our relationship was very, very
good, and we really loved to hunt birds together. I
wrote, he called me in about 1968, and he said, I
want you to do something for me. And I said, well,
certainly I'll do something for you. He said, I
want you to rewrite The Spirit of Aggieland. And I
said, rewrite it or rearrange it? He said, I want
you to rearrange it. He said, we are playing
against Texas Tech, Texas, some of those big
bands, and this is the arrangement that was
written in 1923 by Colonel Dunn, and it's got to be
beefed up. And I said, well, let me try it and see
what happens. When I received the arrangement
they had, well most of it was in two-part harmony.
So that was the first thing we corrected. We put it
in three-part harmony and what we wanted was to get
the same idea, but a much bigger, fuller sound. And
he said, between the yell and the last strain, I
want you to put in a little trumpeting thing,
something different. He said, we just sit there
and we just play. And you'd have to know him to
really understand it. I said, well, I think I have
an idea what you mean. So anyway, I wrote the
arrangement. And I played it with my band, and it
sounded real good to me. So anyway, I sent it to him.
and I didn't hear him that was in the summer of 68 I
did not hear anything from him and I said well I
guess I guess he didn't like it I guess uh uh he
didn't he didn't want to use it and I was playing
golf one Saturday at in my hair with my friends and
one of them just died in a little lag he had his radio
on he's listening to the game between shots and I
heard this this bugling that I put in there, and I
said, my goodness, he's used that arrangement.
And they have been playing it now since 1968, and
that's 20, what? 30. 31 years. And they're still
playing that thing. So he called me back again, and
he said, well, that was good. He said, I've got to
have something with a little pep in it. He said,
we've got nothing but marches and no, I need
something with some pep. So anyway, I wrote him a
song. And we were walking along one day, and he
said, have you ever heard Step to the Rear? We were
hunting. I said, yes, I have. So we walked another
100 yards, and we sat down on a rock, and he said,
have you ever heard Hey, Look Me Over? I said, yes, I
have. He said, well, then when you write that song,
I want it to be somewhere between Step to the Rear
and Hey, Look Me Over. I said, well, okay, I think I
know what you mean. So I wrote this tune. I called it
Gig'Em. And he said, well, you want to name it that?
I said, well, whatever you want to name it. I just
thought that'd be a good one. So that's what they
named it. And he put it on his album that he made that
fall. And we played that up until just a few years
ago. And now we don't play that anymore. But
anyway, those were the two songs that I gave him. he
said well he called me once i want to pay you for
those i said i don't want any money for those
because that's something i just want to do and he
said well i'll either give you money or a bird dog i
said well give me a bird dog because then you give me
money i'll just spend it so i got a bird dog had the
dog 11 years and he was really good So, you know, I
think we had a real fine relationship before I came
to A&M, and the fact I think that, well, there's no
question in anybody's mind, if he had not wanted
me, I would not be there. Now where did he do his
training and preparation? He went to Texas A&M and
he got his degree there, and then he went to
Vandercook, the same place that Jay Brewer, the
associate director now, went to get a music
degree. I think it's in Chicago. And he was a high
school band director. He was at Paris, I think, one
year, and then I think he was down at Humber one
year. I believe he was. And then at that time, if
you'll remember, it was mandatory that you
retired at 65. And that's the only reason he
retired. And so, you know, I was just 43. 44 or
whatever I was, 44, 45, and I had no earthly desire
to retire. And so then this seemed like the thing to
do to me, and
we had a great 17 years. I just wouldn't take
anything for it. When you arrived, describe the
facilities for the band in terms of practice and
instruments that the institution owned. All
right. They had just built a new band hall. one that
they have now it's called the E.V. Adams Band
Building and it was an excellent facility except
it had Rogers in it at that time and it was really too
small for uh after the the second the first year I
was here we had close to 300 then after that we had
300 for a long time and before that they they uh
practiced in dorm 11 and they had one of the walls
knocked so they just had They had two walls. That's
where they practiced on the fourth floor of dorm
11. And so the facility was fine. there was a i
believe when i came here in 72 there were about 15
000 people at a m and i believe we had about three
four thousand girls i'm not sure i'm don't quote me
on that i think that's about right but there was a
real need for some additional instrumental music
uh That was one of the first things that I
encountered when I came, all these people I'd
never heard of, and I couldn't do anything. I just
didn't even know, barely knew how to get to the band
hall. But they wanted some instrumental music.
And so the only instrumental group that they had
was the Aggie band on that campus. And I started the
first year I was there, I started an Aggie concert
band which they had not had. And I also revived the
Aggieland Orchestra, which is a big dance band.
And so these people began to come see me. And being
an old music educator, I could see that they really
had a legitimate reason to want to do it. They just
wanted to play. They had nowhere to go. There were
four Allstate bassoon players on the campus at
that time and just, they were meeting secretly and
doing a bunch of stuff and I could see a bunch of
trouble coming. So I went to see my boss in 19, I
believe it was in 73 was John Coldis and I went to
visit with John. And then he sent me to see Dr.
Williams. And we all agreed that we needed
something to take the pressure off of them because
anybody that was in the Aggie band had to be in the
Corps. Okay. So they gave me permission to start a
university symphonic band, which I did. And we
called it the Texas A&M University Symphonic
Band. And I hired a guy named Joe McMullen, he was
going to do that, and I was going to continue with
the Aggieland Orchestra. So then we had And then
the drumming bugle corps, we put them on a very
impressive rehearsal schedule. You can monitor
them a little more closely. So then all of a sudden
we had five groups. And this was not acceptable by
some of the Aggie band members at first. They
thought I was a traitor or something. I don't know
what they thought. But after they could see what
was going on, a lot of them played in it and it's
still going. And last year they took a tour to
Ireland and I think next year they're going to
Europe somewhere. But anyway this in no way
interfered with the functions of the Aggie band
and if anything it took a lot of pressure off saying
that's the only band you have out in the place. No it
isn't here. So anyway, it worked out real good. And
so the facilities and everything was just fine.
And the band hall was excellent and had the field
right there. And all the guys lived right there in
the dorm. And no one could ever ask for a better band
situation than that anywhere in the world. And
when you arrived, you didn't have to put out any
fires. Nothing was broken. There was a smooth
transition. As far as I, yes. Yes, you could say
that. There's no... Because I did not come here to
change the Aggie band. And in your opinion, or no
one else's opinion, did it need any changes? No. It
was continuity. That was the one thing that we made
clear, and it happened, that I didn't come here to
make waves or change anything. And you know when
you're up there close to number one and you don't do
well, there's not one way you can go. Now you're
talking about pressure on a little old fellow, a
little country boy. I had pressure. And so of
course nobody, everybody thought it was going to
the dogs and it didn't. And we increased the
numbers and the main thing we did was improve on the
playing. and more variety of music. We passed out,
I think the second year, by the second year we'd
pass out 45 tunes. We'd have short versions for
variety. And for the first time ever though, you
know, you don't want to really, you do something
different and not really change anything. And one
of the greatest experiences I think I had, I wrote a